---
title: 'A Journey of Spirit —— towards a performative and philosophical reading of Beethoven Op. 110'
date: 2023-12-24
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

Warning: this is work in progress.

I occasionally write about music, though mainly in Chinese. For Chinese readers, you should check out my 微信公众号: skrjabin, where you can find the original Chinese [version](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/hb6uCDo63NVmy11uM9QkWg) of this article. I plan on writing in English more often in the future, so that my friends on the other side of the world will be able to understand.

Writing an article on one of Beethoven’s late sonatas is no easy task. These sonatas are grand monuments in the piano literature, or even the entire music history, and I am scared of not being able to do them justice, as should anyone who dares to comment on or to perform them. There are a couple reasons why I feel reluctant to write an article as such. For one, any interpretative attempt of Op. 110 bears the most secretive and deeply personal emotions, and to provide an honest reading of Op. 110 is not unlike exploring, dissecting, and publicizing my innermost thoughts. I thus feel naked, having found nowhere to hide, akin to performing the slow movement of a Mozart piano sonata. Should I aim to remain impartial and objective in providing my analysis, or should I peacefully accept any influence of personal narrative I shall project onto the music? Finally, language presents yet another barrier to presenting a satisfactory analysis. It’s not as simple as that I am not a native English speaker — in fact, over the years, I have gotten more or less accustomed to the language — but that when faced with a piece of music as all-inclusive and profound as Op. 110, language is rather insipid and pallid, incapable of conveying its true essence, or even getting anywhere close to it. Indeed, music proves that there are certain limits to language, which can never set foot in the spiritual realm in which music resides. All these obstacles render this article to be the toughest project of mine so far.

My interpretation of the piece will without a doubt change over the years, and I look forward to revisiting my writing in ten, twenty, or thirty years’ time (that is, of course, under the questionable assumption that I will survive until then, which, in a world like this, is not that easy). Many pianists revisit the pieces they played when they were young, and some of them present completely different readings. In that sense, I shall find not only Beethoven, but myself, the young Alex Sheng, in the interpretation. It is fair to say that Op. 110 carries the weight of my youth, my reckless passion and self-indulging sorrow, my yearning and fear for the unforeseeable future, and everything that defines my existence and identity as a 21-year-old. Looking into Op. 110 is rather like looking into a mirror, and what I am doing is to capture this moment of myself in the mirror.

Indeed, Op. 110 is of personal significance to me. Of course I was well familiar with it long ago, but it was not until a few months back that I suddenly felt connected to it on a deeply personal level. At the time, I was drowning in the absolutely lowest point of my life, confronted by many hardships to the point I felt entirely overwhelmed. It was the performance of Op. 110 by Ms. Hélène Grimaud that bestowed hope and restored energy in me. I still remember so clearly as if it happened yesterday, that I sat alone in my dark room, listening to it again and again in great misery. I gradually realize that the essence of human condition is **solitude**, a solitude that is universal and absolute. Most of our pain and suffering comes from the unresolved desire to break from that solitude, which, unfortunately, can neither be truly reached nor diluted, as much as we hope that someday, someone would do that for us. Beethoven never really taught us how to reconcile with our inner solitude, since nobody but oneself has to learn to do that in the span of one’s entire lifetime. But Beethoven did tell us, in the triumphant ending of the grand sonata, that there is a new world that lies at the end of the struggle that one might call victory, or redemption. Yet the journey towards victory is not without agony, and there is no shortcut to it but to endure the entirety of it. We have to simply tread the path ourselves, or to quote from Hegel

"SS20"

Thus, Op. 110 plays an almost apocalyptic role. Extending Hegel’s figure of expressing, we can even map the three late sonatas of Beethoven to the corresponding stages in his phenomenology. Op. 109 is consciousness in sense-certainty and perception, not yet self-consciousness; it takes what it sees as the immediate truth, and it is the purist and most beautiful elegy of a dying person (the phenomenological observer, one might call), reflecting on this sweetest memories. Op. 111, on the other hand, represents the fruits of absolute knowing; it is the otherworldly ramble of the dead person who has already ventured into the netherworld and broke free from the shackles of the perceptions and apprehensions of our world. In other words, it points to the unspeakable truth, which can never be truly understood by us before achieving absolute knowing. In that context, Op. 110 is spirit, which tries to actualize itself, progressing to absolute knowing at the triumphant ending of the sonata. It stands between the boundaries of life and death, and is the phenomenological observer’s reflections of his sufferings at his deathbed. The dying observer, having experienced again in his self-consciousness all of the sufferings of his life in its most condensed form, finally obtains the key to the netherworld; he is thus transfigured, as depicted, for instance, in Richard Strauss’ tone poem Death and Transfiguration.

As such, Op. 110 is “human, all too human”. It is about nothing but the human condition. As a performer, one has to be very sensitive and attentive in order to bring out the subtle crossover between life, death, and rebirth, which has an ethereal floating characteristic to it. I hate to use the adjective “spiritual”, since I find to be too generic, and can be applied to almost all piano works. Yet here, one has to be decidedly spiritual in performance. Yet, it cannot be all mystical and celestial, as in Messiaen or Scriabin — it has to be earthbound and tangible, as what it is ultimately about mankind, residents of this planet. In other words, there has to be some weight and heaviness tied to the notes, as opposed to making them completely afloat like spirits. This reminds me of Nietzsche’s abandonment of Wagner in favor of Bizet’s Carmen, where he accolades Bizet’s celebration of the earthly life and concreteness….Already, we see that the challenge the performer faces in balancing these seemingly contradictory qualities — life and death, the ethereal and the earthly — is paramount.

In what follows, I shall present a detailed analysis of Op. 110 from the perspective of a performer, before going into a commentary on recordings. This is not meant to be a rigorous musicological investigation, but rather a deeply personal and philosophical account. So I half-jokingly remark: everyone is entitled to their own opinion, but only mine is correct; if you disagree with what I said, then unfortunately, you are wrong.

Movement 1
------
